-----
title:   Check for Error
date:  June 14, 2019
-----

# Tutorial
A system curve represents the relationship between flow through a system and the hydraulic losses at that flow. The system curve consists of two parts: friction and static head. A system curve is generated by varying the flow rate through the system from zero flow to some maximum value. 

## Static Head
Static head consists of both the elevation and pressure difference between the supply and destination of the system. This, typically, does not depend on velocity and is therefore constant for the system curve. This can be calculated using the following equation,
where:

- z is elevation
- P is pressure
- ρ is fluid density
- g is gravitational acceleration

=+=
$$x = \Delta (z_{destination} - z_{supply}) + {(P_{destination} - P_{supply}) \over \rho g}$$
=+=

Note that if the supply and destination are at the same pressure, as is often the case when they are open tanks, then the static head is simply the difference in the liquid elevation.

## Frictional Head

The **head loss due to friction** will vary based on flow rate (velocity) and can be calculated for the system components, such as piping, valves, elbows and bends, and end-use equipment, etc. These losses typically vary proportional to the square of the velocity.

Frictional head losses in pipes can be calculated using the Darcy-Weisbach equation shown below.

=+=
$$ \Delta h_f = { {fL \over D} * v^2  \over 2g}$$
=+=

Where:

- *f* is the friction factor
- L is pipe length
- D is pipe diameter
- *v* is fluid velocity
- g is gravitational acceleration

The **Darcy-Weisbach friction factor**, *f*, can be determined using the Colebrook-White equation as shown.

=+=
$$ {1 \over \sqrt t} = -2 \log({\epsilon \over 2.7D_h} + {2.51 \over Re \sqrt f}) $$
=+=
