-----
title:   Tutorial
date:  April 16th, 2019
-----

# System Curve Tutorial
A system curve represents the relationship between flow through a system and the hydraulic losses at that flow. The system curve consists of two parts: friction and static head. A system curve is generated by varying the flow rate through the system from zero flow to some maximum value. 
            
## Static Head
Static head consists of both the elevation and pressure difference between the supply and destination of the system. This, typically, does not depend on velocity and is therefore constant for the system curve. This can be calculated using the following, where z is elevation and P is pressure at that elevation:

=+=
$$x = \Delta (z_{destination} - z_{supply}) + {(P_{destination} - P_{supply}) \over \rho g} $$
=+=

Note that if the supply and destination are at the same pressure, as is often the case when they are open tanks, then the static head is simply the difference in the liquid elevation.

## Frictional Head
The **head loss due to friction** will vary based on flow rate (velocity) and can be calculated for the system components, such as piping, valves, elbows and bends, and end-use equipment, etc. These losses typically vary proportional to the square of the velocity.

Frictional head losses in pipes can be calculated using the Darcy-Weisbach equation shown below.

=+=
$$ \Delta h_f = { {fL \over D} * v^2  \over 2g}$$
=+=
The **friction factor**, f, can be determined using the Colebrook-White equation as shown.

=+=
$$ {1 \over \sqrt f} = -2 \log({\epsilon \over 2.7D_h} + {2.51 \over Re \sqrt f}) $$
=+=

This equation will approximate the Moody diagram. The friction factor is based on the **Reynolds number**, Re, the **pipe diameter**, Dh, and the **pipe roughness**, ε.

The Hazen-Williams equation is another method to determine pipe losses.

## Minor Losses
The frictional head losses for the various components (valves, elbows, orifices, etc.) in the piping system are called "minor losses" the even though these can be the dominate system loss. The loss for the component is often characterized by a constant K and tabulated for several types of components. The head loss is determined by the equation below.

=+=
$$\Delta h_f = {K*v^2 \over 2g} $$
=+=

The pipe (major) and component (minor) losses can be summed together with the pipe losses to determine an overall frictional loss for the system.

=+=
$$\Delta h_f = {({fL \over D} + K) * v^2 \over 2g}$$
=+=

Some systems may be dominated by the frictional losses and will have a steep system curve. Other systems may be dominated by the static head and will have a system curve that will have a larger value at zero flow.

It is important to accurately characterize the system curve to select the correct pump for various operating conditions.

## System Curve
The system curve represents the sum of the static, piping and minor head losses over a range of flow rates and can be represented using the following equation:

=+=
$$\Delta h_{system} = (z_{destination}-z_{supply}) + {(P_{destination}-P_{supply}) \over \rho g} + {({fL \over D} + K) * v^2 \over 2g}$$
=+=